README.md, before:

# ontologies_api

ontologies_api provides a RESTful interface for accessing [BioPortal](https://bioportal.bioontology.org/) (an open repository of biomedical ontologies). Supported services include downloads, search, access to terms and concepts, text annotation, and much more.

## Prerequisites

- [Ruby 2.x](http://www.ruby-lang.org/en/downloads/) (most recent patch level)
- [rbenv](https://github.com/sstephenson/rbenv) and [ruby-build](https://github.com/sstephenson/ruby-build) (optional)
    - If you need to switch Ruby versions for other projects, you may want to install something like rbenv to manage your Ruby environment.
- [Git](http://git-scm.com/)
- [Bundler](https://bundler.io/)
- [4store](https://github.com/ncbo/4store)
    - BioPortal relies on 4store as the main datastore
    - For starting, stopping, and restarting 4store easily, you can try setting up [4s-service](https://gist.github.com/4211360)
- [Redis](http://redis.io)
    - Used for caching (HTTP, query caching, Annotator cache)
- [Solr](http://lucene.apache.org/solr/)
    - BioPortal indexes ontology class and property content using Solr (a Lucene-based server)

## Configuring Solr

To configure Solr for ontologies_api usage, modify the example project included with Solr by doing the following:

    cd $SOLR_HOME
    cp example ncbo
    cd $SOLR_HOME/ncbo/solr
    mv collection1 core1
    cd $SOLR_HOME/ncbo/solr/core1/conf
    # Copy NCBO-specific configuration files
    cp `bundle show ontologies_linked_data`/config/solr/solrconfig.xml ./
    cp `bundle show ontologies_linked_data`/config/solr/schema.xml ./
    cd $SOLR_HOME/ncbo/solr
    cp -R core1 core2
    cp `bundle show ontologies_linked_data`/config/solr/solr.xml ./
    # Edit $SOLR_HOME/ncbo/solr/solr.xml
    # Find the following lines:
    # <core name="NCBO1" config="solrconfig.xml" instanceDir="core1" schema="schema.xml" dataDir="data"/>
    # <core name="NCBO2" config="solrconfig.xml" instanceDir="core2" schema="schema.xml" dataDir="data"/>
    # Replace the value of `dataDir` in each line with: 
    # /<your own path to data dir>/core1
    # /<your own path to data dir>/core2
    # Start solr
    java -Dsolr.solr.home=solr -jar start.jar
    # Edit the ontologieS_api/config/environments/{env}.rb file to point to your running instance:
    # http://localhost:8983/solr/NCBO1

## Installing

### Clone the repository

```
$ git clone git@github.com:ncbo/ontologies_api.git
$ cd ontologies_api
```

### Install the dependencies

```
$ bundle install
```

### Create an environment configuration file

```
$ cp config/environments/config.rb.sample config/environments/development.rb
```

[config.rb.sample](https://github.com/ncbo/ontologies_api/blob/1e68882df83cf78cbb78281b1447c303c783e4c2/config/environments/config.rb.sample) can be copied and renamed to match whatever environment you're running, e.g.:

production.rb<br />
development.rb<br />
test.rb

### Run the unit tests (optional)

Requires a configuration file for the test environment:

```
$ cp config/environments/config.rb.sample config/environments/test.rb
```

Execute the suite of tests from the command line:

```
$ bundle exec rake test 
```

### Run the application

```
$ bundle exec rackup --port 9393 
```

Once started, the application will be available at localhost:9393.

## Contributing

We encourage contributions! Please check out the [contributing guide](CONTRIBUTING.md) for guidelines on how to proceed.

## Acknowledgements

The National Center for Biomedical Ontology is one of the National Centers for Biomedical Computing supported by the NHGRI, the NHLBI, and the NIH Common Fund under grant U54-HG004028.

## License

[LICENSE.md](LICENSE.md)

Commit message:

Ready for local development: Update README and add admin user creation script; modify docker-compose for service ports

README.md, after:

# ontologies_api

ontologies_api provides a RESTful interface for accessing [BioPortal](https://bioportal.bioontology.org/) (an open repository of biomedical ontologies). Supported services include downloads, search, access to terms and concepts, text annotation, and much more.

## Prerequisites

- [Ruby 2.x](http://www.ruby-lang.org/en/downloads/) (most recent patch level)
- [rbenv](https://github.com/sstephenson/rbenv) and [ruby-build](https://github.com/sstephenson/ruby-build) (optional)
  - If you need to switch Ruby versions for other projects, you may want to install something like rbenv to manage your Ruby environment.
- [Git](http://git-scm.com/)
- [Bundler](https://bundler.io/)
- [4store](https://github.com/ncbo/4store)
  - BioPortal relies on 4store as the main datastore
  - For starting, stopping, and restarting 4store easily, you can try setting up [4s-service](https://gist.github.com/4211360)
- [Redis](http://redis.io)
  - Used for caching (HTTP, query caching, Annotator cache)
- [Solr](http://lucene.apache.org/solr/)
  - BioPortal indexes ontology class and property content using Solr (a Lucene-based server)

## Configuring Solr

To configure Solr for ontologies_api usage, modify the example project included with Solr by doing the following:

    cd $SOLR_HOME
    cp example ncbo
    cd $SOLR_HOME/ncbo/solr
    mv collection1 core1
    cd $SOLR_HOME/ncbo/solr/core1/conf
    # Copy NCBO-specific configuration files
    cp `bundle show ontologies_linked_data`/config/solr/solrconfig.xml ./
    cp `bundle show ontologies_linked_data`/config/solr/schema.xml ./
    cd $SOLR_HOME/ncbo/solr
    cp -R core1 core2
    cp `bundle show ontologies_linked_data`/config/solr/solr.xml ./
    # Edit $SOLR_HOME/ncbo/solr/solr.xml
    # Find the following lines:
    # <core name="NCBO1" config="solrconfig.xml" instanceDir="core1" schema="schema.xml" dataDir="data"/>
    # <core name="NCBO2" config="solrconfig.xml" instanceDir="core2" schema="schema.xml" dataDir="data"/>
    # Replace the value of `dataDir` in each line with:
    # /<your own path to data dir>/core1
    # /<your own path to data dir>/core2
    # Start solr
    java -Dsolr.solr.home=solr -jar start.jar
    # Edit the ontologieS_api/config/environments/{env}.rb file to point to your running instance:
    # http://localhost:8983/solr/NCBO1

## Installing

### Clone the repository

```
$ git clone git@github.com:ncbo/ontologies_api.git
$ cd ontologies_api
```

### Install the dependencies

```
$ bundle install
```

### Create an environment configuration file

```
$ cp config/environments/config.rb.sample config/environments/development.rb
```

[config.rb.sample](https://github.com/ncbo/ontologies_api/blob/1e68882df83cf78cbb78281b1447c303c783e4c2/config/environments/config.rb.sample) can be copied and renamed to match whatever environment you're running, e.g.:

production.rb<br />
development.rb<br />
test.rb

### Run the unit tests (optional)

Requires a configuration file for the test environment:

```
$ cp config/environments/config.rb.sample config/environments/test.rb
```

Execute the suite of tests from the command line:

```
$ bundle exec rake test
```

### Run the application

First, set up the required services (4store, Redis, Solr) manually as described above, or using the following docker command:

```
sudo docker compose --profile 4store up -d solr-ut redis-ut 4store-ut mgrep-ut
```

Then, start the application using Rack:

```
$ bundle exec rackup --port 9393
```

Or using shotgun:

```
$ bundle exec shotgun --env=development
```

Once started, the application will be available at localhost:9393.

## Contributing

We encourage contributions! Please check out the [contributing guide](CONTRIBUTING.md) for guidelines on how to proceed.

## Acknowledgements

The National Center for Biomedical Ontology is one of the National Centers for Biomedical Computing supported by the NHGRI, the NHLBI, and the NIH Common Fund under grant U54-HG004028.

## License

[LICENSE.md](LICENSE.md)
